  ShellyLibV2.2
  Randolf Schultz (rschultz@informatik.uni-rostock.de)
  21. 1. 1998

  This is the documentation of ShellyLibV2.2, the ShellShapeGenerator.
  ______________________________________________________________________

  Table of Contents:

  1.      About this Document

  2.      Introduction

  3.      Changes

  4.      Using the Shell Laboratory

  4.1.    The Main Window

  4.2.    The Menu

  4.3.    The 3D-View

  4.3.1.  NURBS

  4.3.2.  Antialiasing

  4.3.3.  Texturing

  4.3.4.  Key and Mouse bindings

  4.4.    The Generation Curve Editor

  4.4.1.  The Menu

  4.4.2.  Key and mouse bindings

  4.4.3.  Inserting and deleting points

  4.4.4.  Fetching the curve from Normal-Mode

  4.5.    The Texture Editor

  4.5.1.  The Menu

  4.5.2.  Generating a texture

  4.5.3.  Parameters of the texture generator

  4.5.4.  Image operations

  4.5.5.  Sundial Tutorial

  5.      Parameters of the Shell Generator

  6.      Calculation Modi

  6.1.    The Nodule mode

  6.2.    The GenCurve mode

  7.      File Format

  8.      Output Formats

  8.1.    Surface Types

  9.      Addresses, Pointers, Literature, Acknowledgements
  ______________________________________________________________________

  1.  About this Document

  This document has been written using the SGML-Tools formatting system
  to generate files in a variety of text formats from one source file.
  There are plain ASCII, HTML and PostScript versions of this document
  prepared for you.

  In addition, you can use the provided SGML-source to generate other
  formats.

  Note, that the plain ASCII version probably misses a lot of formatting
  information.

  2.  Introduction

  ShellyLib is a small set of C-programs for generating seashell or
  snail shapes.  ShellyLib supports many common file formats, see
  section ``Output Formats'', and has been designed to be as portable as
  possible.

  In contrast to Shelly (the ancestor), ShellyLib is not Freeware but
  Shareware.  Please read the file "License"  in the top level of the
  distribution for further information.

  ShellyLib contains a small library ("libshelly") and a GUI called
  "Shell Laboratory", in addition it is possible to compile a command
  line driven shell generator ("shelly").

  The "Shell Laboratory" is written in Tcl/Tk and C, and uses OpenGL for
  immediate rendering of the generated shells.

  The algorithm used to generate the shells is an extended version of
  the algorithm by M.B. Cortie, found in Computer and Graphics, Vol. 17,
  No. 1, pp. 79-84, 1993, "Digital Seashells".  See section ``Addresses,
  Pointers, Literature'' for more references.

  3.  Changes

  Changes from V2.1 to V2.2 are:

  o  General Changes:

  o  A new parameter named "alpha2" has been introduced.  This works
     much like alpha. It allows to adjust the growth rate of the
     generating curve without affecting the helico spiral.  Oops? Read
     section ``Parameters of the Shell Generator'' for more information.

  o  The 3DMF (3D MetaFile) output format has been added; NURBS and
     triangles are supported.

  o  The RIB output now contains own texture coordinates, that improve
     the texture mapping quality. This change is only visible for custom
     generating curves (GCURVE-mode) where the points are not uniformly
     distributed.

  o  A new simple shader (SLtxtsrf) for RenderMan has been added, that
     maps the generated textures on the shells just like the "Shell
     Laboratory" does. Besides that, it shows how to use the custom
     texture coordinates of the RIB output.
  o  Changes to the Shell Laboratory:

  o  Several changes to the hotkeys in the 3D-View and other places have
     been made.

  o  A new RIB output mode (export scene) has been added.  This mode
     saves all movements and rotations etc. you made in the 3D-View as
     well as the shell.

  o  Texture-mapping quality in the 3D-View has been improved for the
     NURBS rendering mode. This change is only visible for custom
     generating curves (GCURVE-mode) where the points are not uniformly
     distributed.

  o  Loading of values (via .shy-files) with higher resolution as the
     corresponding slider allows has been corrected.  The sliders
     resolution is now recalculated according to the loaded value.

  o  Added Antialiasing via viewing-volume-jittering to the rendering
     code.  This improves overall rendering quality and works in all
     rendering modes, although it is not meant to be used with the
     wireframe mode.  Two levels of antialiasing are available.

  o  Added a status-bar, that keeps you informed about whats going on at
     the moment.

  o  Added simple (single step) undo to the texture generator.

  o  Added simple image operations (mix, add, sub) to the texture
     generator. The new texture may be combined with the older one using
     this operations.

  o  Exporting the image of the 3D-View did not work when it was
     resized, fixed.

  o  The ambient, diffuse, specular and background color of the
     shell/view may be changed separately now. Check the "Color" submenu
     of the "Preferences" menu.

  Changes from V2.0 to V2.1 are:

  o  General Changes:

  o  Due to the low registration moral (I received one (!)  registration
     request, thank you!) the license changed again.  Please read the
     file "License" in the top level of the distribution.  Important
     changes are that I do not release the source for free anymore and I
     crippled the free available executables of the Shell Laboratory.
     Registered users can still get the full source, however.

  o  "libshelly" now simulates that the walls of the generated shells
     have a certain thickness, new parameters are "wall" and "wlen" (see
     section ``Parameters of the Shell Generator'' for more
     information).

  o  Nodules are now possible in the "GCurve" mode.

  o  The DXF output format has been added; Splines, polyface-meshes and
     3dfaces are supported.

  o  The RIB output now contains NURBS instead of B-Splines.

  o  The RenderMan shaders have been rewritten. They do respect the new
     wall feature now.

  o  Changes to the Shell Laboratory:

  o  The Shell Laboratory has been ported to WinNT/95.

  o  The Shell Laboratory is now available as stand-alone executable
     that does not need a bunch of .tcl-files or an installed Tcl/Tk at
     all. Precompiled executables are available for Linux, WinNT/95 and
     Irix.

  o  Several changes to the GUI (menu layout, hotkeys etc.)  have been
     made.

  o  The smooth-shaded rendering mode has been replaced by NURBS
     rendering using GLU.

  o  Another rendering mode (NURBS+Wire) has been introduced. This mode
     displays a NURBS surface and the associated control polygon.

  o  A generation curve editor has been added to the Shell Laboratory,
     see section ``The Generation Curve Editor'' for more information.

  o  A texture generator has been added, that utilizes the algorithms
     published in "The Algorithmic Beauty of Sea Shells" by H. Meinhardt
     (see section ``Addresses, Pointers, Literature'' for a complete
     reference, and section ``The Texture Editor'' for the
     documentation).

  o  It is now possible to export the rendered image.

  A lot has changed from version 1.6 of Shelly (the ancestor of
  ShellyLib) to version 2.0:

  o  Legalities have changed, read the file "License"!

  o  Almost everything has been completely rewritten, therefore, I
     suggest to reread the whole documentation, even if you feel
     familiar with Shelly!

  o  Bezier output for POV-Ray creates really smooth surfaces now.

  o  Several new output formats, e.g. Truespace, RIB, SCED, have been
     added.

  o  The handling of scale factors has changed. There are file format
     dependant scale factors now, to ensure a unique size of the
     generated shells over the variety of output formats.

  o  ShellyLib has a really cool GUI now, unfortunately, it is not as
     nearly as portable as the library itself.

  o  The former "NewNod" mode is now called "Nodule" and has been
     improved in terms of speed and usability. The old "Nodule" mode is
     gone.

  o  The code has been split into several parts.  The shell generation
     is done by a small library called "libshelly".  Furthermore, there
     are two example frontends that use the library "shelly" and the
     "Shell Laboratory".

  o  The original algorithm of M.B. Cortie is limited to ellipsoid
     generation curves. ShellyLibV2.0 allows the user to define any
     generation curve in a special new calculation mode called
     "GenCurve".  This is useful for Cones or the "Miraculous
     Thatcheria", which were impossible to generate with the old
     algorithm.

  o  Some special keywords regarding POV-Ray are gone.

  o  Various other goodies have been included in the distribution, for
     instance displacement and surface shaders for RenderMan and a
     reference sheet that helps to understand the algorithm.

  4.  Using the Shell Laboratory

  The "Shell Laboratory" is a GUI for "libshelly".  It is mainly a
  Tcl/Tk script and some C-code to interface to OpenGL (via Togl) and
  "libshelly".

  The main goal of this GUI is to ease the process of parameterization
  through immediate display of the results.

  4.1.  The Main Window

  Each parameter of the shell generator is represented as a line,
  containing

  o  an entry (showing the value of that parameter)

  o  a configurable slider (it's minimum and maximum values are
     displayed in two labels to the right and left)

  o  a button to start the calibration of the slider.

  Since all those parameter-lines fit hardly on any screen, I put them
  into a scroll-able canvas.  You might want to maximize the window size
  to your full screen height.  You can cycle through the entries and
  sliders with <TAB> and <Shift+TAB>.

  Each change of a sliders value results in the following internal
  actions.  At first, a new shell is generated via "libshelly" in the
  mode selected in the "Preferences/SL-Mode" sub menu. Then, the shell
  is displayed as wireframe, shaded polygonal or smooth NURBS model in
  the second window called "3D-View". If you enter a value for a
  parameter directly in the associated entry, the update process starts
  when the focus leaves the entry (the <TAB>-key is pressed or another
  entry is selected with the mouse).

  The initial configuration of the sliders has been choosen to protect
  you from potentially dangerous parameter values, that may crash the
  lab, and to ensure greatest possible freedom in setting any parameter.
  From time to time it may be necessary to reconfigure a slider, so that
  other values than allowed by its initial configuration may be set.
  Each slider may be configured using the associated "Cal." button.
  This will open a modal dialog, where you can change minimum and
  maximum value and, important, the step-size or resolution of the
  slider.  Note, that you cannot set any other value than x = min + (n *
  step-size), (x <= max) with the slider.

  4.2.  The Menu

  o  File

  o  New: reset the lab

  o  Load: loads a set of parameters

  o  Save: saves a set of parameters

  o  Import

  o  Texture (PPM): import an image file in the PPM format to map on the
     shell

  o  Export

  o  Shell: export the calculated shell as object in various formats
     (see section ``Output Formats'' for more information)

  o  POV

  o  DXF

  o  . . .

  o  Scene: export the calculated shell and all transformations of the
     3D-View in RIB format

  o  Texture (PPM): export the current texture as image file in the PPM
     format

  o  3D-View Image (PPM): export the rendered shell as image file in the
     PPM format; Note, that the front buffer will be used for this, make
     sure that no other window destroys the content of this buffer. The
     resulting image files are usually very large, because the ASCII
     version of PPM is used, convert them!

  o  Exit: quits the application

  o  Preferences: (Configuring miscellaneous things)

  o  Mode:

  o  Wireframe: switches to wireframe display (default)

  o  FlatShaded: switches to a flat (constant) shaded representation

  o  NURBS: switches to a NURBS rendered representation

  o  NURBS+Wire: NURBS + control polygon

  o  Projection:

  o  Perspective: Perspective projection (default)

  o  Orthographic: Orthographic projection

  o  Color: Change color and material properties of the shell

  o  Set Ambient Color

  o  Set Diffuse Color

  o  Set Specular Color: color of the highlights

  o  Set Shininess: specularity (0 - 128)

  o  Set Background Color

  o  Antialiasing:

  o  None: disables antialiasing (default)

  o  4 Passes: enables antialiasing using 4 rendering passes

  o  8 Passes: enables antialiasing using 8 rendering passes

  o  DrawCoordsys: switches display of the small coordinate system on or
     off (default: on)

  o  AutoUpdate: If this is enabled, every change of a parameter results
     in an immediate update of the display.  Toggling the checkbox from
     "off" to "on" will not result in an updated display. (default: on)

  o  Set NURBS Quality: allows to change "GLU_SAMPLING_TOLERANCE"

  o  SL-Mode:

  o  Normal: (default)

  o  Nodule:

  o  GenCurve: see section ``Calculation Modi'' for more information on
     these modes

  o  Windows:

  o  GenCurve-Editor: opens the generation curve editor

  o  Texture-Editor: opens the texture editor

  o  Help: (A small online help)

  o  Shell Laboratory: Just a pointer to the original docs.

  o  About Shell Laboratory

  Shortcuts (accelerators) exist for some of these menu entries, see the
  menu entries for more information.

  4.3.  The 3D-View

  This window uses OpenGL to draw the shell.  The shell may be displayed
  as wireframe model or rendered using constant shading or as a NURBS-
  surface.  You may configure this with the "Mode" sub-menu in the
  "Preferences" menu.

  You may rotate, zoom and move the shell (moving along z-axis only)
  with your mouse and keyboard. See the listing of key and mouse
  bindings to learn how to.

  A coordinate system is drawn to help you to navigate. It might be
  helpful to estimate the size of the object, as each axis is exactly 1
  (whatever) long.  It can be switched off with the "DrawCoordsys"
  check-button in the "Preferences" menu.

  The view is updated every time you change the value of a parameter.
  You may change this behavior with the "AutoUpdate" check-button.
  Note, that changing "AutoUpdate" from off to on state does not result
  in an updated display.

  If you get annoyed by the perspective distortions that may occur when
  viewing large objects, use the new orthographic projection mode
  (submenu "Projection" in the "Preferences" menu).

  If you are lost in space use <r> to reset to the default settings.

  4.3.1.  NURBS

  Some notes about the NURBS rendering mode.  Be warned, that NURBS
  rendering may be a very lengthy process, especially if texturing is
  enabled. Under certain conditions it may last too long, even for the
  most patient.  A simple rule to avoid long rendering times:

  Do not render shells that do not fit completely into the view.

  Especially if you zoomed the view a lot, or if you have the impression
  that the viewer is inside or very near the shell (after a rotation or
  parameter change) do not activate NURBS!

  Setting too small values for the "NURBS Quality" (which is actually
  "GLU_SAMPLING_TOLERANCE") is dangerous too, I recommend not to set
  values smaller than 10. However, I have to admit that you need to set
  it to 5 to correctly render some example .shy-files (namely, the
  rippled Cockle and Rapa).

  Even though NURBS represent very smooth surfaces, occasional cracks
  might be visible on the surfaces, dependig on the OpenGL
  implementation.  The NURBS rendered with Mesa usually do not suffer
  from this problem.  On an SGI decreasing "NURBS Quality" or sometimes
  simply rotating the shell a bit helps.

  Even the NURBS rendering speed of normal sized shells might not be
  enough for interactive displays on nowadays commodity workstations
  (Pentium class), thats why the representation is automatically
  switched from NURBS to flat shaded, while rotating and changing
  parameters with the sliders.

  4.3.2.  Antialiasing

  Antialiasing improves the rendering quality using a technique called
  viewing-volume-jittering. The scene is rendered multiple times with
  slightly different camera settings. All passes are accumulated to the
  resulting image.  Note, that the rendering times do not increase
  linearly with the number of rendering passes because of the buffer
  operations (the accumulation process). This means, if you get 10
  frames per second in wireframe rendering mode, you will not get a
  fourth (2 fps) with 4 pass antialiasing, this depends on the speed of
  the buffer operations.  In practice, expect something near 0.75 frames
  per second in wireframe mode!  You see that antialiasing is very slow
  and therefore it is switched off temporarily while rotating and
  changing parameters with the sliders.

  Two levels of antialiasing are available. The 4 passes mode increases
  the quality considerably, while 8 passes give not much more quality
  (compared to the increased effort). Your mileage may vary, however.

  You may toggle antialiasing directly with the <a> hotkey in the 3D-
  View.

  4.3.3.  Texturing

  Texturing can be enabled or disabled with the <t> hotkey.  You may use
  imported textures or textures generated in the "Shell Laboratory" by
  the built-in texture generator.

  Textures should be sized properly in order to be used with OpenGL. Use
  powers of two, otherwise the texture image will get scaled, which is
  something you might not want.

  The "Shell Laboratory" uses mipmaps and bilinear filtering in order to
  achieve the highest possible texture mapped rendering quality
  (depending on the OpenGL implementation). Some strange blurry
  artifacts occurred lately using very large (2048x512) textures, I am
  still investigating this...

  Note, that the white highlight on the shell is not rendered correctly
  if texturing is enabled. This is a limitation of OpenGL, which can be
  circumvented by a multi pass rendering approach (like most limitations
  of OpenGL), but I guess antialiasing is multi pass enough...

  4.3.4.  Key and Mouse bindings

  Here are all the key and mouse bindings:

  <Mouse-Button-1> (the left one) click and drag: rotate around x- and
  y-axis

  <Cursor-Left>, <Cursor-Right>: rotate around z-axis

  <Cursor-Up>, <Cursor-Down>: move along z-axis

  <Shift+Cursor-Up/Down/Left/Right>: move view

  <x/X/y/Y/z/Z>: view along x (y z) axis

  <+>: zoom in

  <->: zoom out

  <r>: reset all transformations

  <a>: toggle antialiasing

  <t>: toggle texturing

  Other useful keybindings are <w> (switch to wireframe), <f> (switch to
  flat shading), <n> (switch to NURBS) and <c> (switch to NURBS +
  control polygon).

  Note, that these key and mouse bindings are available in the 3D-View
  window only!

  4.4.  The Generation Curve Editor

  The generation curve editor (GCE) offers a facility to easily create
  or modify a generation curve, used in the GenCurve-mode of
  "libshelly".

  Some basics:

  o  The GCE always works on a local copy of the generation curve which
     is used by the main part of the Shell Laboratory.  The original
     generation curve, which is used for generating shells, is updated
     only when you want it. (Check the "Update" menu.)

  o  Changes to the generation curve will only have an effect on the
     shell displayed in the 3D-View, if "libshelly" is in the "GenCurve"
     mode.  The GCE will ask you to enable this mode on startup, in case
     you did not activate it by yourself.
  o  You may zoom and move the view of the generation curve with your
     mouse or keyboard, see keybindings.

  o  You may move, delete and insert points of the generation curve.

  o  Atleast two points are needed in a generation curve!

  4.4.1.  The Menu

  The menu-items should be self explanatory.

  o  Window

  o  Close

  o  Update

  o  No automatic Update

  o  Update after move

  o  Update while moving

  o  Update now!

  o  Curve

  o  Insert Point

  o  Delete Point

  o  Fetch from Normal-Mode

  o  Help

  o  Help

  4.4.2.  Key and mouse bindings

  Some accelerators exist for the menu:

  <Ctrl+w>: close window

  <Ctrl+i>: insert point

  <Ctrl+d>: delete point

  <Ctrl+f>: fetch curve from Normal-Mode

  <Ctrl+u>: update generation curve of the main window

  Key bindings for zooming and moving are:

  <Mouse-Button-3>: (the right one) click and drag: move the view

  <Up,Down,Left,Right>: move the view

  <r>: reset all moves

  <+,Add>: zoom into the view x2 (works upto a factor of 8)

  <-,Sub>: zoom out of the view x0.5 (works upto a factor of 0.125)

  4.4.3.  Inserting and deleting points

  To insert a new point simply select the "Insert Point" menu entry,
  then click on a point of the generation curve. Do not release the
  mouse button, but simply drag the new point to it's position.
  Deleting points is even more simple, use the "Delete Point" menu entry
  and select the point to delete with your mouse. Note, that you cannot
  delete any points if there are only two left.

  4.4.4.  Fetching the curve from Normal-Mode

  The fetched curve is the first curve, generated in Normal-Mode. This
  means that certain transformations are applied to the original
  centered ellipsoid curve before fetching!

  You may preview the curve you will get, setting the following
  parameters: "omin" 0 and "omax" 1.

  If you want to start your work on the generating curve with the same
  shell as would be generated in the Normal-Mode set temporarily the
  following parameters:

  "beta" to 90.0;

  "phi","my","omega", "A" to 0.0;

  "a", "b", "scale" to 1.0.

  Now fetch the generating curve, and restore the original values.  This
  does not give you exactly the same shell, but the changes should be
  minimal.

  4.5.  The Texture Editor

  The texture editor (TE) offers a facility to easily create textures to
  be mapped onto the shell shapes generated by "libshelly".  It utilizes
  the algorithms published in "The Algorithmic Beauty of Sea Shells" by
  H. Meinhardt (see section ``Addresses, Pointers, Literature'' for a
  complete reference).  This section is not intended to explain these
  algorithms and their parameters in depth. If you are interested read
  the book.

  Some basics:

  o  The TE always works on a local copy of the texture which is used by
     the main part of the Shell Laboratory.  The original texture, which
     is used for rendering shells and texture export, is updated only
     when you want it.  (Check the "Update" menu.)

  o  Changes to the texture will only have an effect on the shell
     displayed in the 3D-View, if texturing is enabled.  The TE will
     automatically activate texturing when you update the texture.

  4.5.1.  The Menu

  The menu-items should be self explanatory.

  o  Window

  o  Close

  o  Update

  o  No automatic Update

  o  Update after generate

  o  Update now!

  o  Help

  o  Help

  The following hot-keys are defined:

  <Ctrl+w>: close window

  <Ctrl+u>: update texture

  <Ctrl+g>,<g>: generate texture

  <Ctrl+s>,<s>: stop generator

  <Ctrl+z>: Undo

  4.5.2.  Generating a texture

  For your first experiments just select a texture type using the
  "Select type:" listbox and use the "Generate" button.

  Follow these steps to create a texture:

  1. At first, set the desired size of the texture.  If you plan to map
     the generated texture onto a shape in the Shell Laboratory, you
     should stick to sizes that are powers of two (64, 128, 256 etc.),
     as OpenGL demands this. GLU does scale the texture to the next
     power of two, but this might not deliver best results. This scaling
     does not affect the size of the exported textures. Note, that some
     OpenGL implementations impose even more constraints (a maximum
     texture size of 256x256 for instance).  Also note, that some
     texture type specific parameters may need to be adjusted, if you
     select a different height than the default height of 128.

  2. Now select the type of the texture, with the "Select type:"
     listbox. Selecting a type will fill the next two sections of
     adjustable parameters with default values.

  3. You may alter the type specific settings now. Set colors and adjust
     parameters of the texture generator, more information about these
     settings can be found in the next section: ``Parameters of the
     texture generator''.

  4. Choose an image operation now. The default (Overwrite) simply
     destroys the old texture.

  5. Now you can generate the texture, using the "Generate" button. If
     you find that the created texture does not come out right, you
     might stop the generator with the "Stop!" button. Note, that while
     generating a texture, the GUI might respond a little slower than
     usual.

  6. The generated texture can be mapped onto a shell now.  Simply press
     "Ctrl+u", then change to a Flat-shaded or NURBS display. Texture
     mapping may reduce performance drastically on software-only OpenGL
     implementations; switch to the wireframe display before rotating or
     changing parameters!

  4.5.3.  Parameters of the texture generator

  How does the texture generator work?

  It simulates the distribution of substances (e.g. pigments) in the
  cells of a shell over it's lifetime. Several different effects may
  influence the distribution of substances like diffusion.  All these
  different effects are put together in sets of equations. Each set
  allows for the simulation of a specific type of shell pattern. There
  is no general set of equations available that could simulate all
  possible patterns of shells.

  It is clearly beyond the scope of this documentation to explain all
  the equations and their parameters, as they are really complex. I can
  only point you to Meinhardt's book.

  The texture generator implements many (not all!) equations from
  Meinhardt's book "The Algorithmic Beauty of Sea Shells".  The
  parameter names were taken from the example implementation given in
  the book.

  Some features of Meinhardt's software are not implemented in the
  texture generator. It is not able to plot concentrations of different
  substances, but just one (substance A). And the type of the plot is
  always a continuous mapping of the concentration of substance A to
  color values. This mapping can be adjusted with the "Set Color:"
  parameters.  They define an interval of concentration values (the two
  entries) and the accompanying interval in color (the two colored
  buttons).  Two more things are important about this mapping: if the
  concentration of substance A is smaller than the value in the first
  entry, the resulting color is white; if the concentration is bigger
  than the value in the second entry the resulting color will be that of
  the second button.

  Now on to the other parameters. You may select different parameter
  sets with the pop-up-menu that comes up if you press the "Set
  Parameter:" button.

  Up to seven substances (named A to G) may be used for the simulations.
  That's why there are seven numbers in each parameter list (except for
  the "Misc."-section).  The first number in the list (if "Initial
  Concentration (A)" is selected) is the initial concentration of
  substance A, consequently.  The second number is the initial
  concentration of substance B and so on.  Do not confuse the names of
  substances (A to G) with the names of parameters (A, B, C, D, G, R,
  S).

  An important section of parameters is the "Misc."-section.  The
  parameter names from this list (except for "RS") have been taken from
  the example implementation by Meinhardt as well.

  Some simulations depend on random numbers. You can set the amount of
  randomness with the "KR" parameter. The "RS" parameter controls the
  initialization of the random number generator. If "RS" has a value
  other than zero, this value will be used to initialize the random
  number generator.  This is done before each simulation run, this way
  the results of random simulations become predictable.  If you set "RS"
  to zero, the random number generator will not be initialized at all.
  The resulting pattern is not predictable anymore, and you may generate
  different patterns just by pressing the "Generate" button again and
  again.

  For the other parameters, consult the book.  I probably will extend
  the documentation here, but I stop writing now to get the new version
  out as quickly as possible.

  Note, that not every set of equations uses all seven substances.
  Nevertheless, you must have seven numbers in each parameter section
  (except for the "Misc."-section of course).

  Here is a short survival-guide to help you to get certain things done:

  o  Problem; Solution

  o  The pattern is to small/big in O-direction; Increase/decrease "KP"
     (might not work for all texture types, as this actually controls
     the number of iterations used to calculate a single row)

  o  The pattern is to small/big in S-direction; Increase/decrease the
     "Height"-value.

  o  The texture generator seems to stop before the end, leaving a lot
     of white space; If the "wall"-parameter has a value higher than
     "0.0" the texture generator will smoothly fade generated textures
     to white on the texture position that corresponds to the beginning
     of the aperture of the shell.  This way the interior of the shell
     is not textured at all.  If you change "wall" to "0.0" this will
     not happen.

  o  Texture comes out distorted or noisy; Sometimes simply generating a
     new texture will help (if you did not fiddle with any parameters it
     will), otherwise try to decrease "KR" (randomness) or the
     diffusion-constants, which should not be higher than "0.4" to avoid
     numeric instabilities.

  4.5.4.  Image operations

  Image operations may be used to combine generated images, this boasts
  the number of possible patterns.  You may choose between three
  effects, mix, add and sub; they should be self explanatory, if not:
  simply try them out.  Press <Ctrl+z> (single step undo) if you are not
  satisfied with the results.

  Use the associated entry to determine the strength of the effect.

  The two source images should have the same dimensions, unless you want
  funny results.

  4.5.5.  Sundial Tutorial

  As you can see, a complete reference/documentation of all the
  parameters is still missing in the V2.2-documentation.  I added this
  small tutorial instead.

  How was the texture for the Sundial shell on the ShellyLib Home Page
  done?

  1. Load the "Sundial.shy" from the shy archive.

  2. Open the texture editor.

  3. Set the texture width to 1024.

  4. Choose the "IrregularStripes" texture, generate it.

  5. Now we want to add the perpendicular white stripes to the texture.
     Choose the "Stripes3" texture.
  6. Set the  the start value to 0.0, start color to black (0, 0, 0).
     Set the end value to 0.5 and the end color to a middle gray (128,
     128, 128).  This makes the stripes a bit broader(start - end
     values) and limits the generated color values to 128. For sharper
     white perpendicular stripes experiment with higher end values. Use
     "Ctrl+z" to undo the last change to the generated texture, if you
     are unsatisfied with the result!

  7. Set "KP" from 20 to 30 ("Set parameter:/Misc"). This increases the
     number of stripes.

  8. Switch to image operation "Brighten", change the strength of the
     effect to about 80 percent.

  9. Hit generate. Wait. We are done! Update, then render with NURBS.

  5.  Parameters of the Shell Generator

  The basic idea of the algorithm is to simulate a shell shape by
  rotating a growing ellipse around the z-axis, and simultaneously
  displacing it from the z-axis. This results in a flat spiral.  If we
  move the ellipse along the z-axis while rotating, a shell like shape
  will appear. The curve determined by all centers of all ellipses is a
  so called helico-spiral.

  The parameters of this process are divided into 5 groups.  Parameters
  that need to be given in degrees are marked with an asterisk ("*").

     Angular Parameters:
        These parameters change the shape of the helico-spiral ("alpha"*
        and "beta"*) and the tilt of the ellipse against the axes of the
        local coordinate system of the ellipse ("phi"*, "my"*,
        "omega"*). Note, that "alpha"* does determine the growth rate of
        the ellipse too.

        "alpha2"* is a new parameter that has been introduced with V2.2.
        It works much like "alpha"* but it only changes the growth rate
        of the generating curve. At its default setting of 90.0, no
        change to the original growth rate takes place. At a higher
        value it will decrease the growth rate determined by "alpha"*
        and vice versa. Due to the dependence from "alpha"* you have to
        find a new value for "alpha2"* every time "alpha"* is changed!
        See the new "Snail.shy" for an example.

     Linear Parameters:
        They change the size (and shape) of the ellipse ("a", "b") and
        the distance of the first ellipses center from the z-axis ("A").

     Dimensional Parameters:
        They set how many ellipses are calculated ("omin"*, "omax"*,
        "od"*), and how many points on each ellipse are calculated
        ("smin"*, "smax"*, "sd"*).  Finally, a global scale-factor,
        independent from all file format specific scaling, might be
        applied using "Scale".

     Nodule Parameters:
        Change all aspects of nodules, position on the ellipse ("P"*),
        size ("W1"*, "W2"*), length ("L"), number of nodules per whorl
        ("N") and starting point on the spiral ("Nstart"*).
        There are three independent groups of nodules.  Add a "2" to
        each nodule parameter to set parameters of the second nodule
        group. Length of second nodule is therefore "L2".  Do the same
        for the third nodule, with a "3".  There are two more parameters
        to control an offset between the three groups of nodules,
        "Off2"* is the offset between nodule 1 and nodule 2 and "Off3"*
        is the offset between nodule 1 and nodule 3.

     Nodule-Mode Parameters:
        "Scano", "Scans", "Hdo", "Hds" refer to section ``Calculation
        Modi'' for information on this parameters.

     Wall Parameters:
        "wall" defines the thickness of the wall in terms of "a" and "b"
        and "wlen"* defines how many degrees into the interior of the
        shell the wall should be computed. A simple trick allows the
        calculation of the inner walls:

        At the aperture of the shell "a" and "b" are multiplied with
        "wall" and then the shell generator computes the interior with
        negative "od".

        The wall feature is a big win for realism, now even views of the
        aperture of the shell do not reveal the synthetic nature of the
        shell easily.

        Unfortunately, simple scaling of the generating curve does not
        yield best results in every case, namely the GCURVE-mode.

  The most important parameters are "alpha", "beta", "A", "a" and "b".

  Here are some hints on how certain values change the shape of the
  shell.

  o  Alpha 90 means no growing of the ellipse and no spiral shape at
     all.  If beta is 90, too, this will produce a torus like shape. If
     alpha gets smaller the spiral will form and the ellipse will grow.

  o  Beta 90 means no moving of the ellipse along z-axis. This is fine
     for shells like "Nautilus", "Planorbis", "Ammonite" or several
     cockles. If you want to shape a "Turritella" or "Natalina" you have
     to decrease beta.

  o  The meaning of a certain value of A depends highly on a and b.
     Generally, A should be higher as a and b, otherwise the shell may
     look like a sphere.

  6.  Calculation Modi

  6.1.  The Nodule mode

  The parameters "od" and "sd" determine the resolution of the generated
  shell. But if the shell contains nodules that are thin and long you
  would have to use very small "od" and "sd" values in order to shape
  the nodules. This would lead to a real waste of memory, because
  between the nodules the high resolution is not necessary.  To minimize
  memory complexity, the special nodule calculation mode has been
  written. This mode adapts both "od" and "sd" while calculating the
  shell, so that small distances between the calculated points are only
  used when needed, in the nodules.  This process may be controlled with
  the parameters "Scano", "Scans", "Hdo" and "Hds".  "Scano" determines
  the smallest possible distance of two points in O direction, the same
  does "Scans" for the S direction.  "Hdo" defines the smallest possible
  difference in height between two points in O direction, the same does
  "Hds" for the S direction.  The difference in height is being
  calculated using the height of the nodule.  The nodule mode may be
  invoked by the "NODULE" keyword.

  "Hdo" and "Hds" are multiplied by the nodule height of the first
  nodule group, before they are passed to "libshelly", when using the
  example frontends.  The height difference value is now dependant from
  the nodule height.  It is now easier to estimate the effect of a
  certain value, e.g.  0.1 means a tenth of the nodule height, no matter
  how high the nodule actually is.  Note, that this multiplication is
  not done by "libshelly".

  Unfortunately, the result of this mode is of irregular structure.
  This means the only possible output type is triangles. No spline
  output, neither B-spline nor Bezier patches, may be generated using
  this mode.

  6.2.  The GenCurve mode

  The original algorithm of M.B. Cortie is limited to ellipsoid
  generation curves. ShellyLibV2.x allows the user to define any
  generation curve, using the "GenCurve" mode.  This is useful for Cones
  or the "Miraculous Thatcheria", which were impossible to generate with
  the old algorithm.

  The curve needs to be specified as a list of points with the "GCx:"
  and "GCy:" keywords. The parameters "a" and "b" still scale the curve
  as they do it in the other modes with the ellipse, and "A" moves the
  curve.  However, "smin","smax" and "sd" are out of function!  Nodules
  are possible within this mode, but the result depends highly on the
  number of points of the generation curve.

  Note, that the resolution of the shell depends directly on the list of
  points. The spaces between the points are not interpolated.  The
  curves provided in the example data files in the "shy" directory are
  meant to be used with spline output formats like "RPL" or "RIB",
  because the curves contain only few points.  Note that not every
  output format is possible within this mode at present.  You may use:
  "RPL", "RIB", "BEZ", "SCB".

  Switch to this calculation mode with the "GCURVE" keyword.

  7.  File Format

  ShellyLib uses files in a simple format to store sets of parameters.
  You should use a characteristic filename extension like ".shy" for
  these files. However, this is not mandatory.

  Every line of the file is scanned for keywords.  Lines that start with
  an "#" are fully ignored.  If a line contains no keyword it is treated
  like a comment.

  Otherwise the number behind the keyword is copied into an internal
  variable or a flag is set. This implies, that there are two types of
  keywords, so called number-keywords and flag-keywords.  Number-
  keywords need to be combined with a number, flag-keywords have just to
  be there to set something. All names of the number-keywords correspond
  to parameters of the shell generator.

  Number-keywords contain a ":" to remind you to write a number behind
  them. Flag-keywords are written in capital letters.

  Keywords to change the so called "angular parameters" are "alpha:",
  "beta:", "phi:", "omega:", "my:".

  Keywords to change the "linear parameters" are "A:", "a:", "b:".

  Keywords for "dimension parameters" are "Scale:", "smin:", "smax",
  "sd:", "omin:", "omax:", "od:".

  The keywords for nodule 1 are: "P:", "L:", "W1:", "W2:", "N:".

  Nodule 2: "P2:", "L2:", "W12:", "W22:", "N2:", "Off2:".

  Nodule 3: "P3:", "L3:", "W13:", "W23:", "N3:", "Off3:".

  Keywords for wall thickness: "wall:" and "wlen:"

  For an exact description of the parameters read section
  ``Parameters''.

  Keywords for switching output formats are "RPL", "T3D", "RAW", "X3D",
  "BEZ", "RIB", "SCD", "SCB", "TSP", "DXF", "DXC", "DXP".  See section
  ``Output Formats'' for more information regarding the formats.

  Keywords for special calculation modi are "NORMAL", "NODULE",
  "Scano:", "Hdo:", "Scans:", "Hds:", "GCURVE", "GCx:", "GCy:".  See
  section ``Calculation Modi'' for more information.

  Some remarks: Everything is case sensitive ("rpl" is not the same as
  "RPL")!  Double use of the same keyword causes an overwriting of the
  last set value.  Only one keyword per line is allowed. Maximum line
  length is 255 characters.

  8.  Output Formats

  ShellyLib is able generate files in the following formats:

  o  Format, Program, Output-Keyword,  file type (content), remarks.

  o  POV, POV-Ray, "BEZ" / "POV", Bezier Patches, Does not work in
     Nodule-mode! For Nodule-mode use "RAW" and RAW2POV.

  o  RPL, Real3D, "RPL", executable RPL-macro, creates a B-Spline-mesh
     in Normal-mode/GenCurve-mode or a Triset (triangles) in Nodule-
     mode.

  o  RIB, various, "RIB", RenderMan Interface Bytestream creates NURBS.
     Does not work in Nodule-mode.

  o  3DMF, various, "3DM" / "3DN", 3D MetaFile (ASCII) NURBS ("3DN") or
     triangles ("3DM"), NURBS do not work in Nodule-mode.

  o  DXF, various, "DXF" / "DXC" / "DXP", B-Splines ("DXF"), PolyFace-
     Meshes ("DXP") or 3DFaces ("DXC"), "DXF" and "DXP" do not work in
     Nodule-mode.

  o  T3D, T3DLib / Imagine, "T3D", triangle mesh, Note, that Imagine
     cannot directly read these files, convert them from ASCII to binary
     using T3DLib first.

  o  RAW, RAW2POV, "RAW", triangles,

  o  COB, Truespace, "TSP", triangles

  o  SCD, SCED, "SCD" / "SCB", contains a triangle mesh ("SCD") or
     Bezier patches ("SCB"), "SCB" does not work in Nodule-mode.

  o  X3D, X3D, "X3D", triangles, For fast previewing (wireframe) using
     X11.

  For more information regarding compatibility issues (will program xy
  read the file?) refer to the compatibility section of the ShellyLib
  Home Page <http://www.shelly.core.de/>.

  8.1.  Surface Types

  ShellyLib allows you to save the generated shells in a variety of
  different representations, depending on the output format you have
  choosen (and sometimes additionally from the calculation mode).  It is
  important to know some things about the different surfaces, and how
  they are generated:

  o  Bezier-patches result from "POV" or "SCB" output mode.  POVRay and
     SCED do only allow patches that contain 16 controlpoints, four in
     each direction. Bezier surfaces interpolate only the four
     controlpoints on the corners of the patch. Hence, it is not
     possible to simply write Bezier-patches in a way that each point
     calculated by the shell generator becomes a controlpoint of the
     Bezier-patches.  This would result in discontinuities and even
     holes at patch boundaries.  Instead, new controlpoints have to be
     calculated so that the transition between two patches is smooth.
     For each four points of the original data from the shell generator
     a Bezier-patch with 16 controlpoints is being calculated. This may
     increase filesizes considerably!  All generated points at the
     boundaries of the shell will be discarded.  All other points
     generated by ShellyLib will be interpolated by the resulting
     surface. The algorithm used to calculate the controlpoints may
     deliver bad results in highly curved regions (thin long nodules,
     for example).  You need to generate atleast four points in each
     direction to write a file in "POV" or "SCB" format!  Even though a
     single Bezier-patch is built from four generated points, atleast 16
     points are needed to write a single patch (four in each direction).
     This is because the calculation of the controlpoints of the Bezier-
     patch needs information about the surrounding patches.

  o  B-Splines result from "RPL" output mode if ShellyLib is in Normal-
     mode or GenCurve-mode.  The resulting surface does not interpolate
     any generated points, and is much smoother than the Bezier-output.
     You can make Real3D interpolate the outer points of the mesh using
     "triple ends" in the "Modify/Freeform" menu (of Real3D, that is).
     It may be necessary to increase the length of nodules (parameter
     "L:", "L2:" and "L3:") to achieve proper nodule heights.

  o  NURBS result from "RIB" output mode if ShellyLib is in Normal-mode
     or GenCurve-mode.  The resulting surface does only interpolate all
     the endpoints of the surface in S-direction. This is achieved by
     high knotvalues for these points. This has been done to ease the
     work with the generation curve editor (see section ``The Generation
     Curve Editor''). This way start and end point of the specified
     generation curve are touched by the surface. The endpoints in O-
     direction are not interpolated in order to achieve a smooth round
     surface.  Atleast four points in each direction are needed.  The
     shells rendered with GLU-NURBS and the shells rendered using the
     "RIB" output should look exactly the same.

  9.  Addresses, Pointers, Literature, Acknowledgements

  The author may be contacted via e-mail:

  rschultz@informatik.uni-rostock.de

  or snail mail:

  Randolf Schultz
  Unter den Linden 51
  19079 Mirow
  Germany

  New versions and additional information may be obtained via the
  ShellyLib Home Page <http://www.shelly.core.de/>.

  Other resources:

  o  Tcl/Tk:

     Tcl/Tk home <http://www.sunscript.com>

  o  Mesa (a 3D-library with an API similar to OpenGL):

     The Mesa Home Page <http://www.ssec.wisc.edu/~brianp/Mesa.html>

  o  Togl (The missing link between OpenGL and Tcl/Tk):

     Togl Home Page <http://www.ssec.wisc.edu/~brianp/Togl.html>

  o  The SGML-Tools (formerly named Linuxdox-SGML) Home Page:

     SGML-Tools <http://pobox.com/~cg/sgmltools>

  The following literature has been of much help

  o  Digital Seashells, M.B. Cortie, Computer and Graphics, Vol. 17, No.
     1, pp. 79-84, 1993

  o  Shells, S. Peter Dance, Harper Collins Publishers 1992, ISBN 0 7322
     0067 9

  o  The Algorithmic Beauty of Sea Shells, Hans Meinhardt, Springer-
     Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1995, ISBN 3 540 57842 0

  Last, but not least, I would like to thank the following people for
  their invaluable help:

  o  Gini, for moral support and improving my english

  o  Juggi, for help with autoconf, ideas, Beta-test

  o  Pink, for constructive criticism, lighting

  o  Lefti, for WWW-design

  o  coto, for Beta-test

  o  ill, for providing a home for the website

